# Introduction to authentication and authorization

## Identity and access management (IAM)


### Identification

It answers the question, "Who are you?"

Identification is the process by which a user presents himself to the system.

Involves providing a unique identifier such as a username, email address, or user ID.


### Authentication

It answers the question, "Are you really who you claim to be?"

Authentication is the process of verifying:
- something the user knows (password)
- something the user has (phone, token)
- something that is part of the user (biometrics).

Multi-factor authentication (MFA) combines two or more authentication methods to enhance security.


### Authorization

It answers the question, "What are you allowed to do?"

Authorization is the process of determining what an authenticated user is allowed to do.

Involves checking permissions, roles, or policies to grant or deny access to resources or actions.


## Security overview

1. You provide your identity card.
2. Security guard verifies your identity and gives to you an internal access card.
3. And then provide you with this internal access card. It contains all info about you that is relevant to facility
4. When you put the card at a validator on a building door, it verifies if you have permission to enter.

Authentication process:
Login(providing user-password pair) - app provides SecurityContext.
Cookie authentication - app generates and provides the cookie.
Token auth - generates and provides the token.

then a request carries the security context, either cookie or token until it expires(then you lose access to entire web app).

Authorization process:
Each page has different requirements. A page checks if you have necessary permissions
Authorization looks your security context and apply requirements to the security context.
Although you logged in you don't have access to the page.
